hacktivator - Rootstock go tutorial (#282)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/04-tutorials/rootstock-go.md

---
title: Interact with Rootstock using Go
sidebar_label: Interact with Rootstock using Go
sidebar_position: 2
tags: [rsk, rootstock, go, golang, go-ethereum, tutorials, resources, smart contracts]
description: "Go is an easy to learn which combines speed and concurrency. It is widely used in web3 development, especially in the ethereum ecosystem."
---

> 

Reviewer: Hi @iMac7 

Thank you for your submission. Please add a short introduction about the article, what it covers and what the user will learn.

Also add this guide in the index.md in the tutorial folder.

Reviewer: Hi @iMac7 You're yet to add the introduction about what the tutorial is and why it benefits developers looking to build on Rootstock.

## Prerequisites
- Go
    - Install the latest version of Go from [the official website](https://go.dev/).
    To confirm it is installed, run the following command on your terminal. It should provide a valid output with your current go version. The version used in this tutorial is `1.24.1`.
    ```bash
    go version
    ```

> - Valid rootstock wallet (with test RBTC from a [faucet](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/additional-tools/#faucets)) and [API key](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Valid Rootstock wallet (with test RBTC from a [faucet](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/additional-tools/#faucets)) and [API key](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/)
```

## Getting Started
Create a new folder for the project, rsk-go. Enter that folder and initialize the project from the command line.
```bash
go mod init rsk-go
```
This creates a `go.mod` file in the root directory, which holds your project's dependencies.

Install the [`go-ethereum`](https://geth.ethereum.org/) package.

> <br/>Go-ethereum is a library that contains useful helpers for interacting with evm-compatible blockchains such as rootstock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br/>Go-ethereum is a library that contains useful helpers for interacting with evm-compatible blockchains such as Rootstock.
```

```bash
go get github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum
```
This adds the go-ethereum package to your `go.mod` file and automatically generates a `go.sum` file to the same directory, which stores extra data about your project's dependencies.

```go
// go.mod
module rsk-go

go 1.24.1

require github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum v1.15.5
```

:::info[Info]
Observe the changing imports as you paste the code.
:::

## Connect to a Rootstock node

> To confirm that we are actually connected to the rootstock network, we can write code to retrieve data from the blockchain, in this case, get the latest block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To confirm that we are actually connected to the Rootstock network, we can write code to retrieve data from the blockchain, in this case, get the latest block.
```

Create a `main.go` file in the same directory and paste this code inside it.

```go
//main.go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"math/big"

	"github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/ethclient"
)

func main() {

> 	rpcURL := "https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/YOUR-RPC-API-KEY"

Reviewer: Note to the reader to replace with their RPC API key (Testnet), link to guide stated in the tutorial earlier.

	// Set up the RPC connection
	client, err := ethclient.Dial(rpcURL)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to connect to Ethereum node:", err)
	}
	defer client.Close()

	// Fetch the latest block number
	blockNumber, err := client.BlockNumber(context.Background())
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to get block number:", err)
	}

	fmt.Println("Latest block number:", blockNumber)
}
```

> Open a terminal in your current folder and run the code. This displays the latest block in the rootstock testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a terminal in your current folder and run the code. This displays the latest block in the Rootstock Testnet.
```

<br/>Run it again after a few seconds to confirm that the block number increases as expected.
```bash

> go run main.go

Reviewer: Error: Missing go.sum entry for module providing package github.com/gorilla/websocket (imported by github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc).

```
../../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum@v1.15.5/rpc/websocket.go:30:2: missing go.sum entry for module providing package github.com/deckarep/golang-set/v2 (imported by github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc); to add:
        go get github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc@v1.15.5
../../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum@v1.15.5/metrics/cpu_enabled.go:24:2: missing go.sum entry for module providing package github.com/shirou/gopsutil/cpu (imported by github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/metrics); to add:
        go get github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/metrics@v1.15.5
../../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum@v1.15.5/rpc/client_opt.go:22:2: missing go.sum entry for module providing package github.com/gorilla/websocket (imported by github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc);
```

FIX:

Run:
```
go get github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc@v1.15.5 
```

```

> ## Get my RBTC balance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get RBTC balance
```

> Get your wallet ready. You can confirm the balance from other sources such as your metamask wallet to ensure accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To confirm the balance from other sources such as your Metamask wallet to ensure accuracy. Replace `0xMY-WALLET-ADDRESS` with your wallet address.
```

Reviewer: Add a brief explanation about why getting the wallet balance (RBTC) is important. For e.g, to write to the blockchain

Replace the code in `main.go` with the following.
```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"math/big"

	"github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/common"
	"github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/ethclient"
)

func main() {
	rpcURL := "https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/YOUR-RPC-API-KEY"

	client, err := ethclient.Dial(rpcURL)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to connect to Ethereum node:", err)
	}
	defer client.Close()

	myWallet := common.HexToAddress("0xMY-WALLET-ADDRESS")

	rbtcBalance, err := client.BalanceAt(context.Background(), myWallet, nil)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to get RBTC balance:", err)
	}

    // Convert from big Int to a float with 6 decimal places
	f := new(big.Float).SetInt(rbtcBalance)
	formattedBalance := new(big.Float).Quo(f, big.NewFloat(1e18)).Text('f', 6)
	fmt.Println("My RBTC Balance:", formattedBalance)
}
```
Run the code to view your wallet balance on the terminal.
```bash

> go run main.go

Reviewer: Response:

```
go run main.go
My RBTC Balance: 0.398493
```

```

## Interacting With Smart Contracts
Smart contrats generally have two kinds of functions, those which modify the blockchain and those which do not.

> <br/>If a function does not modify the state of the blockchain but only reads from it, there is no need to provide your wallet address.

Reviewer: Add example scenarios where reading or modifying a state (writing) is needed. Briefly explain that writing to the blockchain involves gas operations, etc.

The contract ABI, however, needs to be provided either way.
<br/>Here is the simple smart contract which will be used for the operations below.

> Feel free to use the deployed contract address provided in the code. It is currently deployed on the rootstock testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the deployed contract address provided in the code. It is currently deployed on the Rootstock Testnet.
```

Reviewer: Link to a guide showing how the reader can deploy their own contract to the Rootstock Testnet

  },
  {
    "type": "function",
    "name": "store",
    "inputs": [
      {
        "name": "num",
        "type": "uint256",
        "internalType": "uint256"
      }
    ],
    "outputs": [],
    "stateMutability": "nonpayable"
  }
]`

func main() {
	rpcURL := "https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/YOUR-API-KEY"

	client, err := ethclient.Dial(rpcURL)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to connect to Ethereum node:", err)
	}
	defer client.Close()

	contractAddress := common.HexToAddress("0x8b1Fc84e39B396528431FF97010bF51e458E202d")

	parsedABI, err := abi.JSON(strings.NewReader(storageABI))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to parse ABI:", err)
	}

	callData, err := parsedABI.Pack("retrieve")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to pack retrieve call:", err)
	}

	msg := ethereum.CallMsg{
		To:   &contractAddress,
		Data: callData,
	}
	result, err := client.CallContract(context.Background(), msg, nil)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to call contract:", err)
	}

	output, err := parsedABI.Unpack("retrieve", result)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to unpack result:", err)
	}

	storedNumber := output[0].(*big.Int)
	fmt.Println("Stored Number:", storedNumber)
}

> ```

Reviewer: Response:

```
Stored Number: 3
```

```bash
go run main.go
```

### Send data to the contract

> This is a bit more complex than reading from a contract because you actually need to pay for gas from your wallet.

Reviewer: This section should connect to the previous explanation about reading and writing to the blockchain

> Get your private key ready for the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your private key will be needed for the next step.
```

	}
	defer client.Close()

	contractAddress := common.HexToAddress("0x8b1Fc84e39B396528431FF97010bF51e458E202d")

	parsedABI, err := abi.JSON(strings.NewReader(storageABI))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to parse ABI:", err)
	}

    // Without 0x prefix
	privateKey, err := crypto.HexToECDSA("YOUR-PRIVATE-KEY")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to load private key:", err)
	}

	senderAddress := crypto.PubkeyToAddress(privateKey.PublicKey)

	nonce, err := client.PendingNonceAt(context.Background(), senderAddress)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to get nonce:", err)
	}

	auth, err := bind.NewKeyedTransactorWithChainID(privateKey, big.NewInt(31))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to create authorized transactor:", err)
	}

	storeData, err := parsedABI.Pack("store", big.NewInt(3))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to pack store call:", err)
	}

	// Estimate gas. In case of an error, use a hardcoded value (like the below comment) and comment this block out
	gasLimit, err := client.EstimateGas(context.Background(), ethereum.CallMsg{
		To:   &contractAddress,
		Data: storeData,
	})
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to estimate gas:", err)
	}

> 	// gasLimit := uint64(100000)

Reviewer: Is the reader supposed to uncomment this? 

Based on the failed to estimate gas error, its not clear how to go about this in the troubleshooting section:

```
rsk-go % go run main.go
2025/03/24 14:48:13 Failed to estimate gas:VM Exception while processing transaction: transaction reverted
exit status 1
```

Please explain comment in the code: 	// Estimate gas. In case of an error, use a hardcoded value (like the below comment) and comment this block out

Reviewer: I got this error after uncommenting the gasLimit line

```
go run main.go
# command-line-arguments
./main.go:95:11: no new variables on left side of :=
```

Reviewer: If I comment out the block before

```
 go run main.go
# command-line-arguments
./main.go:10:2: "github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum" imported as ethereum and not used
```

	}

	// Create and send transaction
	tx := types.NewTransaction(
		nonce, contractAddress, big.NewInt(0), gasLimit, gasPrice, storeData,
	)

	signedTx, err := auth.Signer(auth.From, tx)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to sign transaction:", err)
	}

	err = client.SendTransaction(context.Background(), signedTx)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to send transaction:", err)
	}

	fmt.Println("Transaction sent! Hash:", signedTx.Hash().Hex())
}
```
Run the code.
```bash
go run main.go
```
If you get a transaction hash as the output, that means the transaction went through.
Search the transaction hash in the respective [block explorer](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/explorers/rootstock/) for a more detailed result of the execution.

## Troubleshooting
<Accordion>
  <Accordion.Item eventKey="0">
    <Accordion.Header as="h3">missing go.sum entry for module providing package...</Accordion.Header>
    <Accordion.Body>
    ../../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum@v1.15.5/rpc/websocket.go:30:2: missing go.sum entry for module providing package github.com/deckarep/golang-set/v2 (imported by github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/rpc);
    

>     run `go mod tidy` then `go run main.go`.

Reviewer: This worked. Thank you

    </Accordion.Body>
  </Accordion.Item>
  <Accordion.Item eventKey="1">
    <Accordion.Header as="h3">Failed to estimate gas...</Accordion.Header>
    <Accordion.Body>
    error- Failed to estimate gas:VM Exception while processing transaction: transaction reverted.

>     Set a higher gas limit (comment in the `main.go` code in [this section](#send-data-to-the-contract))

Reviewer: This one is not clear

    "name": "store",
    "inputs": [
      {
        "name": "num",
        "type": "uint256",
        "internalType": "uint256"
      }
    ],
    "outputs": [],
    "stateMutability": "nonpayable"
  }
]`

func main() {
	rpcURL := "https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/YOUR-API-KEY"

	client, err := ethclient.Dial(rpcURL)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to connect to Ethereum node:", err)
	}
	defer client.Close()

	contractAddress := common.HexToAddress("0x8b1Fc84e39B396528431FF97010bF51e458E202d")

	parsedABI, err := abi.JSON(strings.NewReader(storageABI))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to parse ABI:", err)
	}

	callData, err := parsedABI.Pack("retrieve")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to pack retrieve call:", err)
	}

	msg := ethereum.CallMsg{
		To:   &contractAddress,
		Data: callData,
	}
	result, err := client.CallContract(context.Background(), msg, nil)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to call contract:", err)
	}

	output, err := parsedABI.Unpack("retrieve", result)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failed to unpack result:", err)
	}

	storedNumber := output[0].(*big.Int)
	fmt.Println("Stored Number:", storedNumber)
}
```
```bash
go run main.go

> Stored Number: 3

Reviewer: Kindly remove the response inside the code block as this may be confusing to the reader copying the code block. 

Response:
Stored Number: 3

Author: done

Reviewer: Thank you @iMac7 

There's an error with the use of RSK. Please ensure consistency in file naming with rootstock-go.

<img width="704" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-02 at 10 55 10" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/97952d7e-3800-4f7d-943f-fdf6bb22a1a4" />
